Investing in

M E N TA L H E A LT H

This publication was produced by the Department of Mental Health and Substance Dependence,
Noncommunicable Diseases and Mental Health, World Health Organization, Geneva.
For further information and feedback, please contact:
Department of Mental Health and Substance Dependence, Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 791 21 11, fax: +41 22 791 41 60, e-mail: mnh@who.int, website: www.who.int/mental_health

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
World Health Organization.
Investing in mental health.
1.Mental disorders - economics 2.Mental disorders - therapy 3.Mental health services - economics
4.Mental health services - economics 5.Cost of illness 6.Investments I.Title.
ISBN 92 4 156257 9

(NLM classification: WM 30)

© World Health Organization 2003
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from Marketing and Dissemination, World Health
Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email:
bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial
distribution – should be addressed to Publications, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there
may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by
the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this publication is complete and correct and shall
not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use.

Designed by Tushita Graphic Vision Sàrl, CH-1226 Thônex, Geneva
Cover photo: © World Health Organization
Printed by Nove Impression, Switzerland

Content

Introduction

3

Executive Summary

4

What is mental health?

7

The magnitude and burdens of mental disorders

8

The economic burden of mental disorders

14

Promoting mental health; preventing and managing mental ill health

26

The gap between the burden of mental disorders and resources

36

WHO Global Action Programme (mhGAP)

40

Much can be done; everyone can contribute to better mental health

43

References

46

For more information

48

2
Photo: © WHO, P. Virot

Introduction
by the Director-General

Mental health has been hidden behind a curtain of stigma and discrimination for too long. It is time to bring it out into
the open. The magnitude, suffering and burden in terms of disability and costs for individuals, families and societies
are staggering. In the last few years, the world has become more aware of this enormous burden and the potential
for mental health gains. We can make a difference using existing knowledge ready to be applied.
We need to enhance our investment in mental health substantially and we need to do it now.

What kinds of investment?
Investment of financial and human resources. A higher proportion of national budgets should be allocated to developing adequate infrastructure and services for mental health. At the same time, more human resources are needed to
provide care for those with mental disorders and to protect and promote mental health. Countries, especially those
with limited resources, need to establish specifically targeted policies, plans and initiatives to promote and support
mental health.
Who needs to invest? All of us with interest in the health and development of people and communities. This includes
international organizations, development aid agencies, trusts/foundations, businesses and governments.

What can we expect from such investment?
It should be able to provide the much-needed services, treatment and support to a larger proportion of the nearly
450 million people suffering from mental disorders than they receive at present: services that are more effective and
more humane; treatments that help them avoid chronic disability and premature death; and support that gives them
a life that is healthier and richer – a life lived with dignity. We can also expect greater financial returns from increased
productivity and lower net costs of illness and care, apart from savings in other sector outlays.
Overall, this investment will result in individuals and communities who are better able to avoid or cope with the stresses and conflicts that are part of everyday life, and who will therefore enjoy a better quality of life and better health.

Lee Jong-wook

3

Executive Summary

For all individuals, mental, physical
and social health are vital and interwoven strands of life. As our understanding of this relationship grows,
it becomes ever more apparent that
mental health is crucial to the overall
well-being of individuals, societies and
countries. Indeed, mental health can
be defined as a state of well-being
enabling individuals to realize their

abilities, cope with the normal stresses
of life, work productively and fruitfully, and make a contribution to their
communities. Unfortunately, in most
parts of the world, mental health and
mental disorders are not accorded
anywhere near the same degree of
importance as physical health. Rather,
they have been largely ignored or
neglected.

The magnitude and burdens of the problem
• As many as 450 million people suffer from a mental or behavioural disorder.
• Nearly 1 million people commit suicide every year.
• Four of the six leading causes of years lived with disability are due to
neuropsychiatric disorders (depression, alcohol-use disorders, schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder).
• One in four families has at least one member with a mental disorder.
Family members are often the primary caregivers of people with mental
disorders. The extent of the burden of mental disorders on family members
is difficult to assess and quantify, and is consequently often ignored.
However, it does have a significant impact on the family’s quality of life.
• In addition to the health and social costs, those suffering from mental
illnesses are also victims of human rights violations, stigma and discrimination, both inside and outside psychiatric institutions.

4

This publication aims to guide you in
the discovery of mental health, in the
magnitude and burdens of mental disorders, and in understanding what can
be done to promote mental health in
the world and to alleviate the burdens
and avoid deaths due to mental disorders. Effective treatments and interventions that are also cost-effective
are now readily available. It is therefore time to overcome barriers and
work together in a joint effort to narrow the gap between what needs to
be done and what is actually being
done, between the burden of mental
disorders and the resources being used
to address this problem. Closing the
gap is a clear obligation not only for
the World Health Organization, but
also for governments, aid and development agencies, foundations,
research institutions and the business
community.

The economic burden of mental disorders
Given the prevalence of mental health and substance-dependence problems in adults and children, it is not surprising
that there is an enormous emotional as well as financial burden on individuals, their families and society as a whole.
The economic impacts of mental illness affect personal income, the ability of ill persons – and often their caregivers –
to work, productivity in the workplace and contributions to the national economy, as well as the utilization of treatment
and support services. The cost of mental health problems in developed countries is estimated to be between 3% and
4% of GNP. However, mental disorders cost national economies several billion dollars, both in terms of expenditures
incurred and loss of productivity. The average annual costs, including medical, pharmaceutical and disability costs, for
employees with depression may be 4.2 times higher than those incurred by a typical beneficiary. However, the cost of
treatment is often completely offset by a reduction in the number of days of absenteeism and productivity lost while
at work.

Alleviating the problem: prevention, promotion and management programmes
A combination of well-targeted treatment and prevention programmes in the field of mental health, within overall public strategies, could avoid years lived with disability and deaths, reduce the stigma attached to mental disorders, increase
considerably the social capital, help reduce poverty and promote a country’s development.
Studies provide examples of effective programmes targeted at different age groups – from prenatal and early infancy
programmes, through adolescence to old age – and different situations, such as post-traumatic stress following accidents, marital stress, work-related stress, and depression or anxiety due to job loss, widowhood or adjustment to retirement. Many more studies need to be conducted in this area, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. There is
strong evidence to show that successful interventions for schizophrenia, depression and other mental disorders are not
only available, but are also affordable and cost-effective.
Yet there is an enormous gap between the need for treatment of mental disorders and the resources available. In developed countries with well organized health care systems, between 44% and 70% of patients with mental disorders do
not receive treatment. In developing countries the figures are even more startling, with the treatment gap being close
to 90%.

5

WHO’s Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP)
To overcome barriers to closing the gap between resources and the need for treatment of mental disorders, and to
reduce the number of years lived with disability and deaths associated with such disorders, the World Health Organization has created the Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP) as part of a major effort to implement the recommendations of the World Health Report 2001 on mental health. The programme is based on strategies aimed at
improving the mental health of populations. To implement those strategies, WHO is undertaking different projects and
activities, such as the Global Campaign against Epilepsy, the Global Campaign for Suicide Prevention, building national
capacity to create a policy on alcohol use, and assisting countries in developing alcohol-related services. WHO is also
developing guidelines for mental health interventions in emergencies, and for the management of depression,
schizophrenia, alcohol-related disorders, drug use, epilepsy and other neurological disorders. These projects are designed
within a framework of activities which includes support to countries in monitoring their mental health systems, formulating policies, improving legislation and reorganizing their services. These efforts are largely focused on low- and middleincome countries, where the service gaps are the largest.

Investing in mental health today can generate enormous returns in terms of reducing disability and preventing premature death. The priorities are well known and the projects and activities needed are clear and possible. It is our responsibility to turn the possibilities to reality.

6

The burden of mental disorders is expected
to rise significantly over the next 20 years:
Are we doing enough to address the growing
mental health challenges?

What is mental health?

Mental health is more than the mere lack

viduals and communities and enabling

strands of life. As our understanding of

of mental disorders. The positive dimen-

them to achieve their self-determined

this interdependent relationship grows, it

sion of mental health is stressed in WHO’s

goals. Mental health should be a concern

becomes ever more apparent that mental

definition of health as contained in its con-

for all of us, rather than only for those

health is crucial to the overall well-being

stitution: “Health is a state of complete

who suffer from a mental disorder.

of individuals, societies and countries.

physical, mental and social well-being and
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” Concepts of mental health include
subjective well-being, perceived self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence and recognition of the
ability to realize one’s intellectual and emotional potential. It has also been defined as
a state of well-being whereby individuals
recognize their abilities, are able to cope
with the normal stresses of life, work pro-

Mental health problems affect society
as a whole, and not just a small, isolated
segment. They are therefore a major
challenge to global development. No
group is immune to mental disorders,

Unfortunately, in most parts of the world,
mental health and mental disorders are
not accorded anywhere the same importance as physical health. Rather, they
have been largely ignored or neglected.

but the risk is higher among the poor,
homeless, the unemployed, persons with
low education, victims of violence,
migrants and refugees, indigenous populations, children and adolescents, abused
women and the neglected elderly.

ductively and fruitfully, and make a contribution to their communities. Mental health

For all individuals, mental, physical and

is about enhancing competencies of indi-

social health are closely interwoven, vital

7

The magnitude and burdens
of mental disorders

A huge toll
2
Today, about 450 million people
suffer from a mental or behavioural
disorder. According to WHO’s Global
Burden of Disease 2001, 33% of the
years lived with disability (YLD) are
due to neuropsychiatric disorders, a
further 2.1% to intentional injuries
(Figure 1). Unipolar depressive disorders alone lead to 12.15% of years
lived with disability, and rank as the
third leading contributor to the global
burden of diseases. Four of the six
leading causes of years lived with
disability are due to neuropsychiatric
disorders (depression, alcohol-use
disorders, schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder).

Burden of diseases worldwide: Disability adjusted life years (DALYs), 2001
Nutritional deficiencies 2%
Perinatal conditions 7%
Maternal conditions 2%
Respiratory infections 6%
Malaria 3%
Childhood diseases 3%
Diarrhoeal diseases 4%

HIV/AIDS 6%

Other NCDs 1%
Malignant neoplasms 5%
Diabetes 1%

Neuropsychiatric disorders 13%
Sense organ disorders 3%

Tuberculosis 2%
Other CD causes 6%

Cardiovascular diseases 10%

Injuries 12%
Congenital abnormalities 2%
Musculoskeletal diseases 2%

Respiratory diseases 4%
Digestive diseases 3%
Diseases of the genitourinary system 1%
Source: WHR, 2002

1
Years lived with disability (YLD):
World
33%

67%

Neuropsychiatric conditions account
for 13% of disability adjusted life
years (DALYs), intentional injuries for
3.3% and HIV/AIDS for another 6%
(Figure 2). These latter two have a
behavioural component linked to
mental health. Moreover, behind
these oft-repeated figures lies enormous human suffering.

Neuropsychiatric disorders
Others
Source: WHR, 2002

• More than 150 million persons suffer from depression at any point in
time;
• Nearly 1 million commit suicide
every year;

8

• About 25 million suffer from
schizophrenia;
• 38 million suffer from epilepsy; and
• More than 90 million suffer from an
alcohol- or drug-use disorder.
The number of individuals with disorders is likely to increase further in view
of the ageing of the population, worsening social problems and civil unrest.
This growing burden amounts to a
huge cost in terms of human misery,
disability and economic loss.

It is becoming increasingly clear that
mental functioning is fundamentally
interconnected with physical and
social functioning and health outcomes. For example, depression is a
risk factor for cancer and heart diseases. And mental disorders such as
depression, anxiety and substanceuse disorders in patients who also
suffer from physical disorders may
result in poor compliance and failure
to adhere to their treatment schedules. Furthermore, a number of
behaviours such as smoking and sexual activities have been linked to the
development of physical disorders
such as carcinoma and HIV/AIDS.

Photo: © WHO, P. Virot

Mental and behavioural problems
as risk factors for morbidity and mortality

Among the 10 leading risk factors for
the global burden of disease measured
in DALYs, as identified in the World
Health Report 2002, three were mental/behavioural (unsafe sex, tobacco
use, alcohol use) and three others
were significantly affected by mental/behavioural factors (overweight,
blood pressure and cholesterol).

9

Mental disorders and medical illness are interrelated
Treating comorbid depression could increase adherence
to interventions for chronic medical illness
Comorbid depression is the existence of a depressive disorder (i.e. major
depression, dysthymia or adjustment disorder) along with a physical disease
(infectious, cardiovascular diseases, neurological disorders, diabetes mellitus
or cancer). It is neither a chance phenomenon nor a mere feeling of demoralization or sadness brought on by the hardships of a chronic illness. While the
prevalence of major depression in the general population can go from an
average 3% up to 10%, it is consistently higher in people affected by chronic
disease (Figure 3).
Patients with comorbid depression are less likely to adhere to medical treatment or recommendations, and are at increased risk of disability and mortality.
For example, it has been shown that depressed patients are three times more
likely not to comply with medical regimens than non-depressed patients;
there is also evidence that depression predicts the incidence of heart disease.
In the case of infectious diseases, non-adherence can lead to drug resistance,
and this has profound public health implications concerning resistant infectious agents.
Illness-associated depression impairs quality of life and several aspects of the
functioning of patients with chronic diseases; moreover, it results in higher
health care utilization and costs.
Clinical trials have consistently demonstrated the efficacy of antidepressant
treatment in patients with comorbid depression and chronic medical illness.
Such treatment improves their overall medical outcomes.

10

Comorbidity, which signifies the simultaneous occurrence in a person of two
or more disorders, is a topic of considerable and growing interest in the
context of health care. Research supports the view that a number of mental disorders (e.g. depression, anxiety,
substance abuse) occur in people suffering from both non-communicable
and communicable diseases more
often than would be expected by
chance. And people suffering from
chronic physical conditions have a
greater probability of developing
mental disorders such as depression.
Rates of suicide are higher among
people with physical disorders than
among other people.
Comorbidity results in lower adherence to medical treatment, an increase
in disability and mortality, and higher
health costs. However, comorbid mental disorders are often underrecognized and not always effectively
treated. Increased awareness and
understanding, as well as comprehensive integrated management may alleviate the burden caused by comorbid
mental disorders on the individual,
society and the health services.

3
Prevalence of major depression in patients with physical illnesses
Hypertension

up to 29%
up to 22%

Myocardial infarction

up to 30%

Epilepsy

up to 31%

Stroke

up to 27%

Diabetes

up to 33%

Cancer

up to 44%

HIV/AIDS

up to 46%

Tuberculosis
General
population
0

up to 10%
10

20

30

40

50

Photo: © WHO, A.S. Kochar

Source: WHO, 2003, unpublished document

11

Mental disorders: a significant burden on the family.
The burden of mental disorders goes beyond that which has been defined
by Disability Adjusted Life Years.
The extent of the burden of mental disorders on family members is difficult
to assess and quantify, and is consequently often ignored. However, it does
have a significant impact on the family’s quality of life.

Family burden cannot be ignored
Family members are often the primary
caregivers of people with mental disorders. They provide emotional and
physical support, and often have to
bear the financial expenses associated
with mental health treatment and
care. It is estimated that one in four
families has at least one member currently suffering from a mental or
behavioural disorder. In addition to
the obvious distress of seeing a lovedone disabled by the consequences of
a mental disorder, family members are
also exposed to the stigma and discrimination associated with mental ill
health. Rejection by friends, relatives,
neighbours and the community as a

whole can increase the family’s sense
of isolation, resulting in restricted
social activities, and the denial of
equal participation in normal social
networks.
Informal caregivers need more support. The failure of society to
acknowledge the burden of mental
disorders on affected families means
that very little support is available to
them. Expenses for the treatment of
mental illness are often borne by the
family because they are generally not
covered by the State or by insurance.
Family members may need to set
aside a significant amount of their

time to care for a person with a mental disorder. Unfortunately, the lack of
understanding on the part of most
employers, and the lack of special
employment schemes to address this
issue, sometimes render it difficult for
family members to gain employment
or to hold on to an existing job, or
they may suffer a loss of earnings due
to days taken off from work. This
compounds the financial costs associated with treating and caring for
someone with a mental disorder.

Talking about mental disorders means
talking about stigma and human rights
Persons with mental disorders often
suffer a wide range of human rights
violations and social stigma.
In many countries, people with mental
disorders have limited access to the
mental health treatment and care they
require, due to the lack of mental
health services in the area in which
they live or in the country as a whole.
For example, the WHO Atlas Survey
showed that 65% of psychiatric beds
are in mental hospitals, where condi-

12

tions are extremely unsatisfactory.
Inpatient places should be moved
from mental hospitals to general
hospitals and community rehabilitation services.

Violations in psychiatric
institutions are rife
Many psychiatric institutions have
inadequate, degrading and even
harmful care and treatment practices,
as well as unhygienic and inhuman liv-

ing conditions. For example, there
have been documented cases of people being tied to logs far away from
their communities for extensive periods of time and with inadequate food,
shelter or clothing. Furthermore, often
people are admitted to and treated in
mental health facilities against their
will. Issues concerning consent for
admission and treatment are often
ignored, and independent assessments
of capacity are not undertaken. This

In addition to the social and economic toll,
those suffering from mental illnesses are also
victims of human rights violations, stigma
and discrimination.

means that people can be locked
away for extensive periods of time,
sometimes even for life, despite having the capacity to decide their future
and lead a life within their community.

Violations also occur outside
institutions: the stigma of mental
illness
In both low- and high-income countries, there is a long history of people
with mental disorders being stigma-

tized along with their families. This is
manifested by stereotyping, fear,
embarrassment, anger, and rejection
or avoidance. The myths and misconceptions associated with mental disorders negatively affect the day-to-day
lives of sufferers, leading to discrimination and the denial of even the
most basic human rights. All over the
world, people with mental disorders
face unfair denial of employment and
educational opportunities, and discrimination in health insurance and

housing policies. In certain countries,
mental disorders can be grounds for
denying people the right to vote and
to membership of professional associations. In others, a marriage can be
annulled if the woman has suffered
from a mental disorder. Such stigma
and discrimination can, in turn, affect
a person’s ability to gain access to
appropriate care, recover from his or
her illness and integrate into society.

Human rights violations of people with mental disorders: the voice of sufferers
Caged beds
Many psychiatric institutions, general hospitals and social care homes in countries continue to use caged beds routinely
to restrain patients with mental disorders and mental retardation. Caged beds are beds with netting or, in some cases,
metal bars, which serve to physically restrain the patients. Patients are often kept in caged beds for extended periods,
sometimes even years. This type of restraint is often used when staff levels or training are inadequate, and sometimes
as a form of punishment or threat of punishment. The use of restraints such as caged beds restricts the mobility of
patients, which can result in a number of physical hazards such as pressure sores, not to mention the harmful psychological effects. People have described the experience as being emotionally devastating, frightening, humiliating, degrading and disempowering. (Caged Beds – Inhuman and Degrading Treatment in Four EU Accession Countries, Mental
Disability Advocacy Center, 2003)

Chained and burned due to accidental fire
August 2001: Twenty-five people were charred to death in Erwadi, India. A devastating fire broke out at 5 a.m. in the
asylum. Of the 46 with mental disorders, 40 had been chained to their beds. Erwadi had long been considered a holy
place, famous for its dargah. During the course of the “treatment”, the persons with mental disorders were frequently
caned, whipped and beaten up in the name of “driving away the evil”. During the day, they were tied to trees with
thick ropes. At night, they were tied to their beds with iron chains. (www.indiatogether.org)

13

The economic burden
of mental disorders

Given the prevalence of mental health
and substance-dependence problems
in adults and children, the emotional,
but also financial, burden on individuals, their families and society as a

whole is enormous, as noted earlier.
The economic impacts of mental illness include its effects on personal
income, the ability of the persons with
mental disorders or their caregivers to

work and make productive contributions to the national economy, as well
as the utilization of treatment and
support services (Table 1).

Table 1. The overall economic burden of mental disorders
Care costs

Productivity costs

Other costs

Sufferers

Treatment and service
fees/payments

Work disability;
lost earnings

Anguish/suffering;
treatment side-effects; suicide

Family and friends

Informal care-giving

Time off work

Anguish; isolation; stigma

Employers

Contributions to treatment and care

Reduced productivity

–

Society

Provision of mental health care
and general medical care
(taxation/insurance)

Reduced productivity

Loss of lives;
untreated illnesses
(unmet needs); social exclusion

To gauge the measurable economic
burden of mental illness, in table 2 the
diverse economic impacts have been
transformed into a single cost-based
measure, and organized by types of

costs based on expenditures made or
resources lost.
An important characteristic of mental
disorders is that mortality is relatively
low, onset often occurs at a young age,

and the indirect costs derived from lost
or reduced productivity in the workplace are high.

Table 2. Types of measurable costs

14

Core costs

Other non-health costs

Direct costs
(payments made)

• Treatment and service fees/payments

• Social welfare administration
• Public and private criminal justice system
• Transportation

Indirect costs
(resources lost)

• Morbidity costs (in terms of value of lost productivity)
• Mortality costs

• Value of family caregivers’ time

Mental disorders impose a range of costs on
individuals, households, employers and
society as a whole.

How much does mental illness cost?

• For the United States Rice and colleagues calculated an aggregate cost
of US$ 148 billion (at 1990 prices)
for all mental disorders. One of the
most important findings is that the
indirect costs either match or outweigh the direct costs for all mental
health areas. Spending on treatment
for mental health and substance
abuse in the United States alone was
estimated at US$ 85.3 billion in
1997: US$ 73.4 billion for mental
illness and US$ 11.9 billion for substance abuse (Mark et al., 2000).

• The estimated total burden of mental health problems in Canada for
1998 was at least Can$ 14.4 billion:
Can$ 8.1 billion in lost productivity
and Can$ 6.3 billion for treatments
(Stephens & Joubert, 2001). This
makes mental health problems one
of the costliest conditions in Canada.

• Patel and Knapp (1997) estimated
the aggregate costs of all mental
disorders in the United Kingdom at
£32 billion (1996/97 prices), 45% of
which was due to lost productivity.

Photo: © WHO, A. Waak

Estimates of costs are not available for
all the various disorders, and certainly
not for all the countries in the world.
Most methodologically sound studies
have been conducted in the United
States and the United Kingdom. At
1990 prices, mental health problems
accounted for about 2.5% of GNP in
the United States (Rice et al., 1990).
In the Member States of the European
Union the cost of mental health problems is estimated to be between 3%
and 4% of GNP (ILO, 2000), of which
health-care costs account for an average of 2% of GNP.

15

Mental health problems in childhood
generate additional costs in adulthood
The costs of childhood disorders can
be both large and largely hidden
(Knapp et al., 1999). Early onset of
mental disorders disrupts education
and early careers (Kessler et al., 1995).
The consequences in adulthood can
be enormous if effective treatment is
not provided (Maughan & Rutter,

1998). Knapp shows in figure 4 that
children with conduct disorders generate substantial additional costs from
ages 10 to 27 years. These are not
mainly related to health, as one would
expect, but to education and criminal
justice, creating a serious challenge for
the social capital as a whole.

4
Costs in adulthood of childhood mental health problems
Additional costs from 10-27 years (in £)
80 000
70 000
60 000
50 000
Criminal justice

40 000

Benefits
30 000

Relationships
Social care

20 000

Health
Education

10 000
0

16

Source: Knapp, 2003
No problems

Conduct problems

Conduct disorder

High costs of mental disorders
compared to other major chronic conditions
comparatively high annual expenditure associated with chronic disease
conditions such as psychosis and neurosis (NHS Executive, 1996; Figure 5
below).

A recent comparative study of the
burdens of disease carried out within
the United Kingdom’s National Health
Service (NHS) demonstrated the relative and absolute costs of care for a
wide range of disorders, including the

5
NHS burdens of disease, 1996
£ million, 1992/93

Psychosis

Neurosis

Diabetes
Inpatient

Breast cancer

Outpatient
Primary care

Ischaemic
Heart Disease

Pharmaceuticals
Community health
Social services (adults)

Hypertension

Source: NHS Executive, 1996
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

17

Another recent study (Berto et al.,
2000) presents prevalence and total
management costs of diseases such as
Alzheimer’s, asthma, cancer, depression, osteoporosis, hypertension and
schizophrenia. As shown in figure 6

for the United States, three mental
disorders considered by Berto et al.
(Alzheimer’s disease, depression and
schizophrenia) present a high prevalence-cost ratio.

6
Prevalence and cost of major chronic conditions: United States
(in millions)
120

100

80

60

40

20

cost (US$ '000)

18

prevalence (n° patients)

CHF: congestive heart failure

Source: Berto et al., 2000

CHD: coronary heart disease

str
ok
e

re
ni
a
hi
sc

or
os
os

te

op

ns
rte
pe
hy

zo
ph

is

n
io

es
et
di
ab

de

pr
es
s

io

n

D
CH

F
CH

er
ca

nc

a
m
th
as

is
rit
th
ar

Al
zh

eim

er

0

7
Even more interesting is to consider
different diseases in terms of the average cost per patient, as shown in figure 7: Alzheimer’s disease and
schizophrenia are the two most costly
diseases, their average cost per patient
being higher than cancer and stroke.

Yearly cost per patient of selected major conditions: United States
US$/patient/year
25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

e
str
ok

re
ni
a

is

ph

zo

op

or
os

hi
sc

ns
io
n
te

rte
pe

hy

os

es
et

n

ab

sio

de
p

di

D

CHF: congestive heart failure
CHD: coronary heart disease

re
s

F

CH

CH

r

a

ce
ca
n

is

m
th
as

rit
th
ar

Al

zh

eim

er

0

Source: Berto et al., 2000

In many developed countries, 35% to 45% of
absenteeism from work is due to mental health problems
In the United States, mental illness is
considered responsible for an estimated 59% of the economic costs deriving from injury or illness-related loss
of productivity, followed by alcohol
abuse at 34% (Rouse, 1995). A report
from a Canadian university (Université
Laval, 2002) revealed that absences
for psychological reasons had

increased 400% from 1993 to 1999,
and that the costs of replacement,
together with those of salary insurance, amounted to Can$ 3 million for
the year 2001. A survey on psychiatric
morbidity in the United Kingdom
showed that people with psychosis
took an average of 42 days a year off
work. The same survey reveals that

persons with two or more neurotic
disorders had an average of 28 days
off per year compared to 8 days off
for those with one neurotic disorder
(Patel & Knapp, 1997).

19

Decreased productivity at work:
even if an employee does not take sick leave, mental health problems
can result in a substantial reduction in the usual level of activity and performance

Photo: © WHO, P. Virot

A recent study from Harvard Medical
School examined the impact of psychiatric disorders on work loss days
(absence from work) among major
occupational groups in the United
States (Kessler & Frank, 1997). The
average number of work loss days
attributable to psychiatric disorders
was 6 days per month per 100 workers; and the number of work cutback
days (getting less done than usual)
was 31 days per month per 100 work-

20

ers. Although the effects on work loss
were not significantly different across
occupations, the effects on work cutback were greater among professional
workers. Work loss and cutback were
found to be more prevalent among
those with comorbid disorders than
among those with single disorders.
The study presents an annualized
national projection of over 4 million
work loss days and 20 million work
cutback days in the United States.

Mental illness affects access
to the job market and job retention
The special case of depression
The burden of depression is rising, affecting both the working and social lives
of individuals.
In the United States, it has been estimated that 1.8% to 3.6% of workers
suffer from a major depression, and that employees with depression are
disabled at nearly twice the rate of persons without depression (Goldberg
& Steury, 2001). In 2000, 7.8 million Canadians were treated for depression,

In the United States 5–6 million workers between the ages of 16 and 54
years either lose, fail to seek, or cannot
find employment as a consequence of
mental illness. Among those who do
manage to find work, it has been estimated that mental illness decreases
annual income by US$ 3500 to
US$ 6000 (Marcotte & Wilcox-Gok,
2001).

which represents an increase of 36% compared to the previous year.
In a large United States financial services company, depression resulted in an
average of 44 work-days taken off for short-term disability as compared to
42 days for heart disease, 39 days for lower back pain, and 21 days for asthma (Conti & Burton, 1994). Studies suggest that the average annual costs,
including medical, pharmaceutical and disability costs, for employees with
depression may be 4.2 times higher than those incurred by a typical beneficiary (Birnbaum & al., 1999). However, it has also been found that the cost
of treatment for depression is completely offset by a reduction in the number
of days of absenteeism. Moreover, it is demonstrated that the cost of achieving a partial or full remission from major depression declined between 1991
and 1996.
If the burden of depression is rising, costs to treat it are declining, and the
quality of care has been improving over time. Specific investments to prevent
and cure major depression can and should be made in both developed and

In the United Kingdom, a 1995 survey revealed that over half of the
people with psychosis were classed as
permanently unable to work, about a
fifth were in employment and one in
eight was unemployed (Patel &
Knapp, 1997).
Individuals with comorbid mental
and physical disorders consistently
have lower rates of employment
than persons with a physical disorder
alone. In several surveys, approximately 20% fewer individuals with
both physical and mental disorders
reported being employed than individuals with only a physical disorder
(McAlpine & Warner, 2002).

developing countries.

21

The burden of substance abuse
• 76.3 million persons are diagnosed
with alcohol disorders;

8
Deaths in 2000 attributed to addictive substance abuse-related risks

• At least 15.3 million persons are
affected by disorders related to drug
use;
• Between 5 and 10 million people
currently inject drugs;
• 5%–10% of all new HIV infections
globally result from injecting drugs;
• More than 1.8 million deaths in
2000 were attributed to alcoholrelated risks;

High mortality developing countries
Low mortality developing countries
Developed countries
Illicit
drugs

Source: WHO, 2002

0

500

1000

1500

• 205,000 deaths in 2000 were
attributed to illicit drug use (Figure 8);

Number of deaths (000s)

• The government, drug abusers and
their families shoulder the main economic burden of drug abuse; and

which could have been prevented.
Alcohol abuse is also responsible for
neuropsychiatric disorders, domestic
violence, child abuse and neglect, and
productivity loss.

• For every dollar invested in drug
treatment, seven dollars are saved in
health and social costs.
Abuse of alcohol and other substances
continues to be one of the most serious
public health problems in both developed and developing countries. Worldwide, alcohol accounted for 4% of the
total burden of diseases in 2000.
In Latin American countries, alcohol
was the leading risk factor for the
global burden of diseases in 2000. Of
an estimated 246,000 alcohol-related
deaths in this region, about 61,000
were due to unintentional and intentional injuries (WHO, 2002), all of

22

Alcohol

In South Africa, 25%–30% of general
hospital admissions are directly or indirectly related to alcohol abuse (Albertyn & McCann, 1993), and 60%–
75% of admissions in specialized substance abuse treatment centres are for
alcohol-related problems and dependence. Almost 80% of all assault
patients (both males and females)
presenting to an urban trauma unit in
Cape Town were either under the
influence of alcohol, or injured
because of alcohol-related violence
(Steyn, 1996). The majority of victims
of train-related accidents, traffic acci-

2000

dents – both pedestrians and drivers –
had blood alcohol levels exceeding the
legal limits (Van Kralingen et al, 1991).
Foetal alcohol syndrome is by far the
most common cause of mental disability in the country (Department of
Trade and Industry, 1997).
In Asia, substance abuse is considered
the main cause in 18% of cases presenting problems in the workplace
(EAP, 2002). In Thailand, the percentage of substance abusers aged 12–65
years varies from 8.6% to 25% in
different regions of the country, the
highest percentage being in the northeast. In New Zealand (with a population of 3.4 million) alcohol-related lost
productivity among the working population was estimated to be US$ 57
million a year (Jones et al., 1995).

In the United States, the total economic cost of alcohol abuse was estimated at US$ 185 billion for 1998
(Harwood, 2000). More than 70%
of this cost was attributed to lost productivity (US$ 134.2 billion), including
losses from alcohol-related illness
(US$ 87.6 billion), premature death
(US$ 36.5 billion) and crime
(US$ 10.1 billion). Health care expenditures accounted for US$ 26.3 billion,
of which US$ 7.5 billion was spent on
treating alcohol abuse and dependence and US$ 18.9 billion on treating
the adverse medical consequences of
alcohol consumption. Other estimated
costs included property and administrative costs due to alcohol-related
automobile crashes (US$ 15.7 billion),
and the costs of the criminal justice
system for alcohol-related crime
(US$ 6.3 billion) (Figure 9).

In the United Kingdom, about
150,000 people are admitted to hospital each year due to alcohol-related
accidents and illnesses. Alcohol is
associated with up to 22,000 deaths
a year. Deaths from cirrhosis of the
liver have nearly doubled in the last
10 years. A recent government report
shows that alcohol abuse costs the
country at least £20 billion a year.
The study found that 17 million work-

days are lost to hangovers and alcoholrelated illnesses each year. This costs
employers £6.4 billion. One in 26 NHS
“bed days” is taken up by alcoholrelated illness, resulting in an annual
cost to the taxpayer of £1.7 billion.
The cost of clearing up alcohol-related
crime is a further £7.3 billion a year.
Moreover, drink leads to a further
£6 billion in “social costs”.

9
Cost of alcohol abuse in USA, billion US$, 1998
150

120

90

60

30

0
lost
productivity

health care

vehicle crashes

criminal justice
system
Source: Harwood, 2000

23

Diseases related to alcohol and substance abuse are therefore a serious
public problem. They affect development of the human and social capital,
creating not only economic costs for

society as a whole, including the
health system, but also social costs in
terms of injuries, violence and crime.
They also affect the well-being of
future generations (Figure 10).

10
Excessive alcohol consumption and impaired health of the family

More money
is spent on
alcohol

Less food,
less education

Less income,
more loans

Poor living
conditions

Health
of family
members
Malnutrition

Excessive
alcohol
consumption

Sickness,
absenteeism,
job loss
Minor
convictions
Accidents and
injuries
Gambling

24

Financial
problems

Wife and
children have
to work

Less health
care

Social stigma

Infections
like TB, worm
infestation

Stunted
development
of children

Talking about mental disorders means talking
about poverty: the two are linked in a vicious circle
Since mental disorders generate costs
in terms of long-term treatment and
lost productivity, it can be argued that
such disorders contribute significantly
to poverty. At the same time, insecurity, low educational levels, inadequate
housing and malnutrition have all
been recognized as contributing to
common mental disorders. There is
scientific evidence that depression is
1.5 to 2 times more prevalent among
the low-income groups of a population. Poverty could therefore be considered a significant contributor to
mental disorders, and vice-versa.
The two are thus linked in a vicious
circle (Figure 11), and affect several
dimensions of individual and social
development:

Work
Unemployed persons and those who
fail to gain employment have more
depressive symptoms than individuals
who find a job (Bolton & Oakley,
1987; Kessler & al., 1989; Simon & al.,
2000). Moreover, employed persons
who have lost their jobs are twice as
likely to be depressed as persons who
retain their jobs (Dooley & al., 1994).

Education

Violence and trauma

Studies have shown a significant relationship between the prevalence of
common mental disorders and low
educational levels (Patel & Kleinman,
2003). Moreover, a low educational
level prevents access to most professional jobs, increases vulnerability and
insecurity and contributes to a persistently low social capital. Illiteracy and
illness therefore lock in poverty.

In communities afflicted by poverty,
violence and abuse are not unusual.
They affect general mental well-being,
and can induce mental disorders in the
most vulnerable.
Without well-targeted and structured
investment in mental health, the
vicious circle of poverty and mental
disorders will be perpetuated, thereby
preventing poverty alleviation and
development.

11
Poverty and mental disorders: a vicious circle

Poverty

Physical disorders

Violence and trauma

Mental disorders
Suicide
Alcohol
Depression
Substance Abuse
Child/adolescent development problems
Post traumatic stress disorders

25

Promoting mental health; preventing
and managing mental ill health

In order to reduce the increasing
burden of mental disorders and avoid
years lived with disability or death,
priority should be given to prevention
and promotion in the field of mental
health. Preventive and promotional
strategies can be used by clinicians
to target individual patients, and by
public health programme planners
to target large population groups.

Integrating prevention and promotion
programmes for mental health within
overall public health strategies will
help to avoid deaths, reduce the stigma attached to the persons with mental disorders and improve the social
and economic environment.

Is it possible to promote mental
health and prevent mental disorders?
Within the spectrum of mental
health interventions, prevention and
promotion have become realistic and
evidence based, supported by a fastgrowing body of knowledge from
fields as divergent as developmental
psychopathology, psychobiology,

26

prevention, and health promotion
sciences (WHO, 2002). Prevention
and promotion programmes have
also been shown to result in considerable economic savings to society
(Rutz et al., 1992).

Much can be done to reduce the burdens of
mental disorders, avoid deaths and promote
mental health in the world.

Mental health promotion
A growing body of cross-cultural evidence indicates that various psychological, social and behavioural factors
can protect health and support positive mental health. Such protection
facilitates resistance (resilience) to disease, minimizes and delays the emergence of disabilities and promotes
more rapid recovery from illness
(WHO, 2002). The following studies
are illustrative. Breast-feeding (advocated by the joint WHO/UNICEF
Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative,
Naylor, 2001) improves bonding and
attachment between infants and

mothers, and significantly improves
child development. Promotive interventions in schools improve selfesteem, life skills, pro-social behaviour,
scholastic performance and the overall
climate.
Among various psychosocial factors
linked to protection and promotion in
adults are secure attachment; an optimistic outlook on life, with a sense of
purpose and direction; effective strategies for coping with challenge; perceived control over life outcomes;
emotionally rewarding social relationships; expression of positive emotion;
and social integration.

Photo: © WHO, P. Virot

Health promotion is the process of
enabling people to gain increasing
control over their health and improve
it (WHO, 1986). It is therefore related
to improving the quality of life and
the potential for good health, rather
than only an amelioration of symptoms (Secker, 1998). Psychosocial
factors influence a number of health
behaviours (e.g. proper diet, adequate
exercise, and avoiding cigarettes,
drugs, excessive alcohol and risky sexual practices) that have a wide-ranging impact in the domain of health
(WHO, 2002).

27

When can interventions for
prevention of mental disorders begin?
Visits by nurses and community workers to mothers during pregnancy and
after childbirth, in order to prevent
poor child care, child abuse, psychological and behavioural problems in
children and postnatal depression in
mothers, have proved to be extremely
effective on a sustainable basis (Olds
et al., 1988). Teaching mothers about
early monitoring of growth and development in low-birth-weight babies,
along with proper maternal advice,
can prevent poor intellectual develop-

ment (Infant Health and Development
Programme, 1990). Early stimulation
programmes can enable mothers to
prevent the slow development often
seen in preterm infants, and improve
the physical growth and behaviour of
such infants (WHO, 1998). Such programmes can also reduce the number
of days spent in hospital (Field et al.,
1986), and thus result in economic
savings. Nutrient supplements to prevent neuropsychiatric impairment
have also been found to be useful.

For example, iodine supplementation
programmes through iodination of
water or salt (recommended by WHO,
1996; 2001) can help prevent cretinism and other iodine-deficiency disorders (Sood et al., 1997; Mubbashar,
1999). Moreover, it may have a positive effect on the intelligence level of
even apparently healthy populations
living in iodine-deficient areas (Bleichrodt & Born, 1994).

Preventive strategies are useful
even during childhood and adolescence
Preventive interventions reduce
depression and feelings of hopelessness, aggressive and delinquent
behaviour, as well as alcohol, tobacco
and drug use, on a sustained basis
(Schweinhart & Weikart, 1992; WHO,
1993; Bruene-Butler et al, 1997;
Shochet et al, 2001).

28

Training teachers and parents has
been shown to improve detection of
problems and facilitate appropriate
interventions.

A stitch in time
It is possible to prevent the majority
of suicides and suicide attempts
among schoolchildren through a comprehensive schools-based prevention
programme that includes appropriate
modifications to school-based policy,
teacher training, parent education,
stress management and a life-skills
curriculum, along with the introduction of a crisis team in each school
(Zenere & Lazarus, 1997).

Veliana, 6 years old, Bulgaria

Psychosocial interventions, such as
cognitive-behavioural therapy and
family-based group intervention for
“high risk” children, prevent the
development of anxiety disorders
(Dadds et al., 1997) and reduce
depressive symptoms and conduct
problems (Jaycox et al., 1994).
Depression in adolescence has a high
risk of recurrence in adulthood, and is
also associated with the risk of development of personality problems or
conduct disorders.

29

How can prevention help adults and the elderly?
There is considerable evidence which
shows that preventive strategies
improve marital, relational and occupational functioning. It is possible to
reduce dysfunctional marital communication, sexual difficulties, divorce
and child abuse among young couples
through education and skills training
(Renick et al., 1992; Cowan & Cowan,
1992). Programmes to cope with widowhood and bereavement have been
seen to help reduce depressive symptoms and facilitate better adjustment
(Vachon et al., 1980). Similarly, studies
have shown that stress-management
skills and occupational stress-management training for personnel at risk
(e.g. nursing personnel, bus drivers,
teachers and blue collar workers) can
be very useful. It has also be seen that
retrenched workers who received adequate counselling coped better, had
fewer depressive symptoms and managed to find better jobs (Vinokur et
al., 1992). Retrenchment and job loss
can cause depression, anxiety and
many other problems such as alcoholism, marital stress and child abuse,
and can even can lead to suicide.

30

Physician advice and other forms of
brief intervention have been found to
be effective in reducing alcohol abuse
(Babor & Grant, 1992). Brief interventions have also been tried to reduce
smoking (Kottke et al., 1988). Strategies to prevent alcohol and other substance abuse through mass
campaigns, including the use of alcohol warning labels, have been successful in raising awareness (MacKinnon
et al., 2000). Similarly, communityintervention programmes aimed at
women, that involve community coalitions, task forces and support groups,
help reduce smoking (Secker-Walker
et al., 2000).
The introduction of mandatory bicycle
helmet use leads to a substantial
reduction in head injuries that can
cause neurological and mental disabilities (Cameron et al., 1994). Short cognitive-behavioural programmes for
victims of vehicular and industrial accidents (Fecteau & Nicki, 1999; Bryant
et al., 1998) are beneficial in the prevention and management of posttraumatic stress disorder.

Prevention of suicidal behaviour
It is also influenced by the availability
of methods used for that behaviour.
This diversity calls for an integration of
different approaches at the population
level in order to achieve significant
results.
According to the best evidence available (WHO, 1998), the following
interventions have demonstrated efficacy in preventing some forms of suicidal behaviour:

• Control of availability of toxic substances (particularly pesticides in
rural areas of some Asian countries);
• Detoxification of domestic gas and
car exhaustion;
• Treatment of people with mental
disorders (particularly depression,
alcoholism and schizophrenia);
• Reduction of access to firearms; and
• Toning down of press reports about
suicides.

Hoang Gia, 9 years old, Vietnam

The prevention of suicidal behaviour
(both attempted and completed suicide) poses a series of particular challenges at the public health level. On
the one hand, subjects at risk of suicidal behaviour cover a wide age range,
from early adolescence to later life.
On the other hand, the risk of suicidal
behaviour varies greatly according to
several sociocultural factors (among
which age, gender, religion, socioeconomic status) and mental status.

31

Treatment of mental disorders:
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
The widening recognition of mental
health as a significant international
public health issue has led to the
growing need to demonstrate that
investment of resources in service
development is not only required,
but also worthwhile. Specifically, it
is important to collect evidence of
effective and appropriate mental
health care strategies that are also

cost-effective and sustainable.
Although the volume of completed
studies remains modest, particularly
in middle- and low-income countries,
there is increasing economic evidence
to support the argument that interventions for schizophrenia, depression
and other mental disorders are not
only available and effective, but are
also affordable and cost-effective.

12
Treatment effects on disability
Percent total improvement in disability
50%

40%

30%

Psychosocial effect

20%

Drug effect
Placebo effect
10%

0%
Schizophrenia

32

Bipolar disorder

Depression

Panic disorder

How effective are treatments for
burdensome psychiatric conditions?
Figure 13 illustrates the effectiveness
of treatment, provided through community outreach care (low-cost drug
therapy and basic psychosocial support), on the economic burden and
disability of untreated schizophrenia
in India; not only did disability
improve dramatically, but the overall
costs associated with the condition
(which included care-giving time by
family members) also fell. These
effects were sustained over an 18month follow-up period.

13
Changes in disability following community outreach treatment
of untreated schizophrenia in rural India
60
WHODAS II disability score

There is considerable literature concerning the efficacy and effectiveness
of a wide range of pharmacological,
psychosocial and care management
strategies for treating both psychiatric
disorders and addiction. Figure 12 on
opposite page illustrates the reduction
in disability following pharmacological
and psychosocial treatment, alone or
in combination. As can be seen, the
extent of improvement over no treatment at all is as much as 50%. Thus,
while currently available interventions
do not completely cure the disability
associated with these conditions, they
have a substantial advantage over no
treatment at all, which unfortunately,
is often the case. This raises the question of the costs involved in realizing
these health improvements.

50
40
30
20
10
0

0

3

6

9

12

15

18

Follow-up assessment (months)

33

What are the costs of effective treatment?
The alarmingly low level of resources
available in developing countries to
treat mental health problems, relative
to the affected population for which
the resources are needed, has been
highlighted by the WHO ATLAS project (WHO, 2001). The generation of

a more evidence-based approach to
mental health budgetary planning,
resource allocation and service development represents an underdeveloped
but much needed component of
national mental health policy in developing regions of the world.

WHO has embarked upon the worldwide collection of such an evidence
base by means of its WHO-CHOICE
project, including estimation of the
cost and efficiency of a range of key
treatment strategies for burdensome
mental disorders. Figure 14 below

14
The annual cost per case (or episode) of evidence-based psychiatric treatment
Cost per treated case (in international dollars, I$)

Africa

Schizophrenia
Older anti-psychotic drug
+psychosocial treatment
Bipolar disorder:
Mood stabiliser drug
+psychosocial treatment

Latin America

Depression:
Older anti-depressant drug
+proactive care

Middle East

Panic disorder:
Older anti-depressant drug
+psychosocial treatment
Eastern Europe

SE Asia

W Pacific

0

34

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

shows the estimated cost of first-line
treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder on a hospital outpatient
basis, and also the cost of primary
care of depression and panic disorder,
based on estimated use of health care
resources that would be required to
produce the expected reduction in disability. Costs are expressed in international dollars (I$), which take into
account the purchasing power of different countries. It is clear that more
severe psychiatric conditions such as
schizophrenia require substantially
greater resource inputs (mainly
because a proportion of cases need to
be hospitalized or provided with residential care outside hospital). By contrast, the cost of effectively treating an
episode of depression is estimated to
be in the region of I$ 100–150.

Cost-effectiveness should be just one of several criteria used in the decisionmaking process for funding prevention/treatment of mental disorders.
These economic evaluations should be supplemented by other arguments.
For example:
• People with mental disorders are more at risk of human rights violations
and are more likely to be discriminated against in accessing treatment and
care;
• Achievement of physical health targets, such as:
– Infant and child mortality can be reduced through improved treatment
of postnatal depression;
– HIV/AIDS infection rates for the 17-24 year-old age group are reduced
because improved mental health reduces unsafe sex and drug use;
– There is better adherence to treatments for other ailments (e.g. tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, hypertension, diabetes and cancer treatments);
• Caregivers benefit from a lower burden of care, which means better quality
of life and fewer work days lost, and thus less loss of income;
• Employers benefit from better working environment, reduced absenteeism
and higher productivity;
• Governments benefit from less cost-shifting and transfer payments;
• Mental health is a key variable in successful programmes for sustainable
development and poverty reduction.

35

The gap between the burden of
mental disorders and resources

15
Treatment gap rates (%) by disorder (world)
100
80
60
Treated
40

Untreated

20
0
Schizophrenia

Even though mental, brain and substance-use disorders can be managed
effectively with medication and/or
psychosocial interventions, only a
small minority of patients with mental
disorders receives even the most basic
treatment. Initial treatment is frequently delayed for many years. In
developed countries with well-organized health care systems, between
44% and 70% of patients with
depression, schizophrenia, alcohol-use
disorders and child and adolescent
mental illnesses do not receive treatment (Figure 15) in any given year.
In developing countries, where the
treatment gap is likely to be closer to
90% for these disorders, most individuals with severe mental disorders are
left to cope as best they can.

36

Major
depression

More than 40% of all countries
worldwide have no mental health
policy and over 30% have no mental
health programme. Over 90% of
countries have no mental health policy
that includes children and adolescents.
Out-of-pocket expenditure was the
primary method of financing mental
health care in many (16.4%) countries. Even in countries where insurance cover is provided, health plans
frequently do not cover mental and
behavioural disorders at the same
level as other illnesses; this creates
significant economic difficulties for
patients and their families.

Alcohol use
disorder

Child/adolescent
mental disorders

Mental health budget in low-income countries:
non-existent or inadequate
In spite of the importance of a separate mental health budget within the
overall health budget, 32% of countries included in the ATLAS study
(WHO, 2001) reported not having a
specific governmental budget for
mental health. Of those that actually
reported having one, 36.3% spent
less than 1% of their total health
budget on mental health. Countries
categorized on the basis of income
levels (World Bank classification) differ

considerably in terms of the proportion of their governmental budget for
mental health to their total health
budget (Figure 16). The poorer countries have small health budgets, from
which they spend a lower percentage
on mental health, resulting in very few
resources being available. Poor provision of mental health care results in
poor outcomes, avoidable relapses
and insufficient rehabilitation.

16
Share of mental health budget in total health budget
of countries by income level (%) (World Bank classification)
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

1.54

2.78

3.49

Low income

Low Middle
Income

Higher Middle
Income

6.89
High Income

Total Health Budget
Mental Health Budget

37

The relationship between the burden of
mental disorders and spending is clearly
inappropriate.

A wide gap between the burden of
neuropsychiatric disorders and the mental health budget
Mental and behavioural disorders are
estimated to account for 13% of the
global burden of disease, yet, on average, the mental health budgets of
countries constitute only 2% of their
total health expenditures (Figure 17).

17
Burden of neuropsychiatric disorders vs budget
15%
12%
9%
6%

13%

3%

2%

0%

Photo: © A. Mohit

Burden of
neuropsychiatric disorders
as a percentage
of all disorders

38

Median mental health
budget as a percentage
of total government
health budget

Urgent action is needed to close the
treatment gap and to overcome barriers which
prevent people from receiving appropriate
care.

There are several barriers to people’s access
to appropriate mental health care
Stigma

Lack of drugs

Around the world, many people with
mental disorders are victimized for
their illness and become the targets of
unfair discrimination. Access to housing, employment and normal societal
opportunities is often compromised.

Though 85% of countries have an
essential drugs list that countries use
as a basis for procuring therapeutic
drugs, almost 20% of countries do
not have at least one common antidepressant, one antipsychotic, and
one antiepileptic in primary care.

Discrimination in insurance
coverage for mental disorders
In many countries, since mental disorders are not covered by health insurance schemes, many people cannot
afford treatment. One-quarter of all
countries do not provide disability
benefits to patients with mental disorders. One-third of the world’s population – 2 billion people – lives in
countries that spend less than 1% of
their health budgets on mental health.

Wrong priorities
Too many countries (mainly developed
countries) still spend most of their
resources on a few large mental asylums, which focus only on a small
fraction of those who need treatment;
even these institutions generally provide poor quality care and often inhumane conditions and treatment.

Lack of skills at the primary
health care level
Too few doctors and nurses know
how to recognize and properly treat
mental disorders. In 41% of countries
there are no mental health training
programmes for primary health care
professionals.

Lack of rational and
comprehensive mental health
policies and legislation
• 40% of countries do not have
a mental health policy;
• 25% of countries do not have
mental health legislation; and
• 30% of countries do not have a
national mental health programme.

39

WHO Global Action Programme
(mhGAP)

Year of Mental Health: 2001
WHO declared 2001 the Year of Mental Health and that year’s World
Health Day was a resounding success.
Over 150 countries organized important activities, including major speeches by political leaders and the
adoption of new mental health legislation and programmes.
At the 2002 World Health Assembly,
over 130 Ministers responded positively with a clear and unequivocal

message: mental health, neglected for
too long, is crucial to the overall wellbeing of individuals, societies and
countries, and must be universally
regarded in a new light. The theme of
the World Health Report 2001 was
mental health, and its 10 recommendations have been positively received
by all Member States.

As a result of the activities in 2001,
the Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP) has been created.
mhGAP is WHO’s major new effort to
implement the recommendations of
the World Health Report 2001. The
programme is based on four strategies
(Figure 18) that should help enhance
the mental health of populations.

18
Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP):
the four core strategies
Enhanced
mental
Reduced

health of
populations

Enhanced

Reduced

disease

mental

stigma and

burden

Increased

health

discrimination

country

services

capacity

40

Information

Advocacy

Integrated

Enhanced

for better

against

policy and

public health

decisions

stigma and

service

research

discrimination

development

capacity

Advocacy, information, policy and research
are the key words underlying WHO’s new
global mental health programme, which aims
at closing the gap between those who receive
care and those who do not.

Strategy 1
Increasing and improving information for decision-making and technology transfer to increase country capacity.
WHO is collecting information about the magnitude and the burden of mental
disorders around the world, and about the resources (human, financial, sociocultural) that are available in countries to respond to the burden generated by
mental disorders. WHO is disseminating mental health-related technologies
and knowledge to empower countries in developing preventive measures and
promoting appropriate treatment for mental, neurological and substanceabuse disorders.

Strategy 2
Raising awareness about mental disorders through education and
advocacy for more respect of human rights and less stigma.
The World Health Organization is establishing the first all-inclusive global
partnership of mental health-related constituencies: the Global Council for
Mental Health. It will act as a forum for mental health, stimulating and lending support to activities aimed at promoting implementation of the 10 recommendations of the World Health Report 2001 in all regions. Professional
NGOs, family members and consumer groups, leaders of religious groups,
parliamentarians, labour and business organizations are all enthusiastic about
pursuing activities for the improvement of mental health through this common platform led by WHO.

41

At the Executive Board meeting in January 2002 a resolution on
mental health encouraging continued activity in this area was
adopted. The resolution strongly supports the direction of mhGAP
and urges action by Member States. The resolution was endorsed
unanimously by the World Health Assembly in May 2002.

Strategy 3
Assisting countries in designing policies and developing comprehensive and effective mental health services. The scarcity of resource forces their rational use.
The World Health Report 2001 and the Atlas: Mental Health Resources in the World, have revealed an unsatisfactory
situation with regard to mental health care in many countries, particularly in developing countries. WHO is engaged in
providing technical assistance to Ministries of Health in developing mental health policy and services. Building national
capacity is a priority to enhance the mental health of populations.
WHO has designed a mental health policy and service guidelines to address the wide variety of needs and priorities in
policy development and service planning, and a manual on how to reform and implement mental health law.
To put plans into action, WHO is adapting the level and types of implementation to the general level of resources of
individual countries. In the particular case of developing countries, where the gap between mental health needs and the
resources to meet them is greater, WHO will offer differentiated packages of “achievable targets” for implementation
(Gap Reduction Achievable National Targets/GRANTs) to countries grouped by at least three levels of resources (low,
middle and relatively higher). These packages provide the minimum required set of feasible actions to be undertaken to
comply with the 10 recommendations spelt out in the World Health Report 2001. Achievement of the identified targets
will influence both health and social outcomes, namely mortality due to suicide or to alcohol/illicit drugs, morbidity and
disability due to the key mental disorders, quality of life, and, finally, human rights.

Strategy 4
Building local capacity for public mental health research in poor countries.
Besides advocacy, policy assistance and knowledge transfer, mhGAP formulates in some detail the active role that information and research ought to play in the multidimensional efforts required to change the current mental health gap at
country level.
WHO is developing several projects and activities to promote this strategy at country level, including a research fellowship programme targeting developing countries. A project on the cost-effectiveness of mental health strategies is being
implemented in selected countries to generate real estimates on the costs and benefits of mental health interventions.
These estimates will then be used to enhance mental health services at country level.

42

Much can be done; everyone can
contribute to better mental health

Interventions can be implemented
immediately and widely with existing
knowledge and technology. The
returns in terms of reducing disability
and preventing premature death are
enormous.

Prevention of childhood mental
problem
Mother & child care
Adequate care during pregnancy and
around childbirth prevents brain and
mental disorders. Early childhood social
stimulation also ensures better psychosocial development and prevents
emotional and conduct disorders.
School-based programmes
Psychosocial interventions by teachers
and counsellors can prevent depression, aggressive behaviours and substance abuse among students.

Suicide prevention
Media interventions
Mental health professionals can initiate
codes of conduct for the mass media
to ensure that they do not glamorize
instances of suicide, so as to prevent
further suicides in communities.
Restriction of means to commit suicide
It has been demonstrated that restrictions on the availability of means to
commit suicide (e.g. pesticides) can be
effective in their prevention. Laws and
regulations could curb the availability
of dangerous substances.

Prevention of alcohol-related
problems
Higher taxation
Higher taxes on alcoholic beverages
uniformly bring down the consumption levels, leading to substantial
reduction in alcohol-related problems.

Brief interventions
Models of brief interventions applied
within primary health care settings have
proved to be effective for most people
with alcohol-related problems (25%
reduction in alcohol consumption).

Depression
Early identification of people suffering
from depressive disorders
We know that even in high-income
countries almost 50% of those suffering from depression are not identified.
Early identification means more effective treatment and avoidance of disability and death by suicide.
Care in primary health services
Depressive disorders can be effectively
treated, in most instances, with common and inexpensive medicines and
simple psychosocial interventions. This
is possible within primary health services with the provision of some basic
training and appropriate medicines.

43

Schizophrenia
Maintenance on antipsychotic
medicines
Once this disorder is diagnosed and
treatment is begun, most patients
need continued follow-up and regular
medicines. This costs very little, but
results in substantial reduction in disability and improvement in quality of
life.
Involvement of family in care
Families are the most significant partners in the care of chronic mental disorders. Simple interventions delivered
to the families can enhance the quality
of life both of the patient and of the
whole family. And relapse can be prevented.

Mental retardation
Iodinization of salt
Using iodized salt is the single most
effective prevention activity in areas
deficient in iodine. Millions of children
can escape long-lasting intellectual
deficits by this most inexpensive public health measure.

44

Training to parents
Parents can help children with mental
retardation to achieve their full potential for development. Simple training
to parents can go a long way in ensuring the best environment for children
with mental retardation.

Epilepsy
Anti-stigma campaigns
The biggest barrier to treatment for
epilepsy is stigma. Campaigns against
stigma result in a larger proportion of
those affected getting much-needed
treatment as well as reintegration into
schools and their communities.
Availability of medicines
Antiepileptic medicines cost very little,
but their availability within health care
services is limited. Ensuring regular
availability of these medicines makes
treatment possible, even in
the poorest countries: up to 70%
of newly diagnosed cases can be
successfully treated.

Human rights
Legislation should be modernized.
Monitoring of human rights violations
should be put in place. Quality of
basic care in psychiatric settings
should be improved. All this will
ensure a better quality of life and
more dignity for patients. A substantial component of interventions for
mental disorders is that of enabling
patients to fully enjoy their rights of
citizenship.

Everyone can contribute

Everyone can contribute
Foundations
Communities

Private sector

Families

NGOs

Science
institutions

Mental
Health
Policy makers
and governments

Individuals

Media

Mental health
professionals

45

References

Albertyn C, McCann M (1993). Alcohol, Employment and Fair Labour Practice. Cape Town, Juta.
Babor TF, Grant M (1992). Project on identification
and management of alcohol-related problems.
Report on Phase II: A randomized clinical trial of
brief interventions in primary health care. Geneva,
World Health Organization.
Berto P et al. (2000). Depression: Cost-of-illness
studies in the international literature: A review.
The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 3: 3-10.
Birnbaum HD, Greenberg PE, Barton M (1999).
Workplace burden of depression: A case study in
social functioning using employer claims data.
Drug Benefits Trends, 11: 6BH-12BH.
Bleichrodt N, Born MP (1994). A meta-analysis of
research on iodine and its relationship to cognitive
development. In: Stanbury, JB, ed. The Damaged
Brain of Iodine Deficiency. New York, Cognizant
Communication Corporation: 195-200.

Jones S, Casswell S, Zhang JF (1995). The economic
costs of alcohol-related absenteeism and reduced
productivity among the working population of New
Zealand. Addiction, 90 (11): 1455–1461.

Department of Trade and Industry, South Africa
(1997). Liquor Policy Aper and Liquor Bill (Government Gazette N° 18135). Pretoria, Government Printer.

Kessler RC, Turner JB, House JS (1989). Unemployment, reemployment, and emotional functioning in a community sample. American
Sociological Review, 54(4): 648–657.

Dooley D, Catalano R, Wilson G (1994). Depression and unemployment: Panel findings from the
epidemiologic catchment area study. American
Journal of Community Psychology, 22(6):
745–765.
EAP Seminar (2002). Mental Health Promotion
and Drug Prevention in the Workplace. Organized by the Department of Mental Health, Thailand, Bangkok.
Fecteau G, Nicki R (1999). Cognitive behavioural
treatment of post traumatic stress disorder after
motor vehicle accident. Behavioural & Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 27: 201–214.

Bolton W, Oakley K (1987). A longitudinal study
of social support and depression in unemployed
men. Psychological Medicine, 17(2): 453–460.

Field TM et al. (1986). Tactile/kinesthetic stimulation effects on preterm neonates. Paediatrics, 77:
654–658.

Bruene-Butler L et al. (1997). The improving
social awareness social problem-solving project.
In: Albee GW, Gullota TP, eds., Primary Prevention Works. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage.

Goldberg RJ, Steury S (2001). Depression in the
workplace: Costs and barriers to treatment. Psychiatric Services, 52 (12): 1639, December.

Bryant RA et al. (1998). Treatment of acute stress
disorder: A comparison of cognitive-behavioural
therapy and supportive counselling. Journal of
Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 66: 862–866.
Cameron MH et al. (1994). Mandatory bicycle
helmet use following a decade of helmet promotion in Victoria, Australia: An evaluation. Accident
Analysis & Prevention, 26: 325–37.

46

Dadds MR et al. (1997). Prevention and early
intervention for anxiety disorders: A controlled
trial. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology,
65: 627–635.

Harwood H (2000). Updating estimates of the
economic costs of alcohol abuse in the United
States: Estimates, update methods, and data.
Report prepared by the Lewin Group for the
National Institutes on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
Infant Health and Development Programme
(1990). Enhancing the outcomes of low birthweight premature infants: A multi-site randomized trial. JAMA, 1990, 263: 3035–3042.

Conti DJ, Burton WN (1994). The economic
impact of depression in a workplace. Journal of
Occupational Medicine, 36: 988.

International Labour Office (ILO) (2000). Mental
Health in the Workplace. (Document prepared
by Phyllis G, Liimatainen, M-R), ILO, Geneva.

Cowan C, Cowan P (1992). When partners
become parents: The big life-change for couples.
New York, Basic Books.

Jaycox LH et al. (1994). Prevention of depressive
symptoms in school children. Behaviour Research
& Therapy, 32: 801–816.

Kessler RC et al. (1995). Social consequences of psychiatric disorders, I: Educational attainment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152(7): 1026–1032.
Kessler RC, Frank RG (1997). The impact of psychiatric disorders on work loss days. Psychological Medicine, 27(4): 861–873.
Knapp MRJ, Almond S, Percudani M (1999).
Costs of schizophrenia. In: Maj M, Sartorius N
(eds.). Evidence and Experience in Psychiatry
(Volume 1). London, John Wiley and Sons.
Knapp MRJ (2003). Paper presented at the seminar on Mental Health Economics: new European
dimension, Madrid, 03 April 2003.
Kottke TE et al. (1988). Attributes of successful
smoking cessation interventions in medical practice: A meta-analysis of 39 controlled trials.
JAMA, 259(19): 2883–2889.
MacKinnon D et al. (2000). The alcohol warning
and adolescents: 5-year effects. American Journal of Public Health, 90: 1589-1594.
Marcotte DE, Wilcox-Gok V (2001). Estimating
the employment and earnings costs of mental illness: Recent developments in the United States.
Social Science & Medicine, 53 (1) 21-27.
Mark T et al. (2000). Spending on mental health
and substance abuse treatment, 1987-1997.
Health Affairs, July/August.
Maughan B, Rutter M (1998). Continuities and
discontinuities in antisocial behaviour from childhood to adult life. In: Ollendick TH, Prinz RJ
(eds.), Advances in Clinical Child Psychology.
New York, Plenum.

McAlpine D, Warner L (2002). Barriers to
Employment among Persons with Mental Illness:
A Review of the Literature. Working paper, Disability Research Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA.

Rutz W et al. (1992). Cost-benefit analysis of an
educational program for general practitioners
given by the Swedish Committee for Prevention
and Treatment of Depression. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 85: 457-464.

Mubbashar MH (1999). Mental health services in
rural Pakistan. In: Tansella M, Thornicroft G
(eds.), Common Mental Disorders in Primary
Care. London, Routledge.

Schweinhart LJ, Weikart DP (1992). High/Scope
Perry Preschool Program outcomes. In: McCord J,
Tremblay RE (eds.), Preventing Antisocial
Behaviour: Interventions From Birth Through
Adolescence. New York, Guilford Press: 67-86.

Naylor AJ (2001). Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative.
Protecting, promoting and supporting breast-feeding in the twenty-first century. Paediatric Clinics
of North America, 48: 475-483.

Secker J, 1998. Current conceptualizations of
mental health and mental health promotion.
Health Education Research, 13: 57-66.

NHS Executive, Department of Health (United
Kingdom) (1996). Burdens of disease: a discussion document. London, Department of Health.

Secker-Walker R et al. (2000). Helping women
quit smoking: Results of a community intervention program. American Journal of Public Health,
90: 940-946.

Olds DL et al. (1988). Improving the life-course
development of socially disadvantaged mothers: A
randomized trial of nurse home visitation. American Journal of Public Health, 78: 1436-1444.

Shochet IM et al. (2001). The efficacy of a universal school-based program to prevent adolescent depression. Journal of Clinical Child
Psychology, 30: 303-15.

Patel A, Knapp M (1997). The cost of mental
health: Report to the Health Education
Authority. Working paper, Centre for Economics
of Mental Health, Institute of Psychiatry. London.

Simon GE et al. (2000). Recovery from depression, work productivity, and health care costs
among primary care patients. General Hospital
Psychiatry, 22(3): 153-162.

Patel V, Kleinman A (2003). Poverty and common mental disorders in developing countries.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
Geneva, 81(8).

Sood A et al. (1997). Relevance and importance
of universal salt iodinization in India. The National Medical Journal of India, 10: 290-293.

Renick MJ, Blumberg SL, Markman HJ (1992).
The Prevention and Relationship Enhancement
Programme (PREP): An empirically based preventive intervention program for couples. Family
Relations, 41: 141-147.

Stephens T, Joubert N (2001). The economic burden of mental health problems in Canada.
Chronic Diseases in Canada, 22(1): 18-23.
Steyn E (1996). Women and Trauma. Medical
Research Council. Trauma Review, 4(2) 1-2.
Université Laval (2002). La santé mentale au travail. Report by Université Laval, Canada.

Rice D et al. (1990). The Economic Costs of
Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Illness,
Publication No. (ADM) 90-1694, Alcohol, Drug
Abuse and Mental Health Administration,
Rockville.

Vachon MLS et al. (1980). A controlled study of
self-help interventions for widows. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 137: 1380-1384.

Rouse BA (ed) (1995). Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Statistics Sourcebook. (DHHS
Publication No. SMA 95-3064). Washington, DC,
U.S. Government Printing Office.

Van Kralingen et al. (1991). Alcohol and the
injured driver: The “PODDER” project conducted
at the Groote Schuur Hospital trauma unit. Technical Report DPVT/170. Pretoria: CSIR.

Vinokur AD, Schul Y, Price RH (1992). Demographic assets and psychological resources in the reemployment process: Who benefits from the JOBS
intervention for the unemployed? Working Paper,
Michigan Prevention Research Centre. Institute of
Social Research. University of Michigan, USA.
WHO-CHOICE (2003). Cost-effectiveness of
interventions for reducing the burden of mental
disorders: A global analysis (WHO-CHOICE).
GPE Discussion Paper (prepared by Chisholm D),
Geneva, World Health Organization.
World Health Organization (1986). Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion. Geneva.
World Health Organization (1993). Life Skills
Education In Schools. Geneva,
WHO/MNH/PSF/93.7A.Rev.2.
World Health Organization (1996). Prevention
and control of iodine deficiency disorders. Resolution of the 49th World Health Assembly of
WHO. Geneva, WHA49.13.
World Health Organization (1998). Improving
mother/child interaction to promote better psychosocial development in children. Geneva,
WHO/MSA/MHP/98.1.
World Health Organization (2001). World Health
Report 2001, Geneva.
World Health Organization (2002). World Health
Report 2002, Geneva.
World Health Organization (2002). Strengthening
mental health. Resolution of the Executive Board
of the WHO. Geneva. EB109.R8.
World Health Organization (2002). Mental
Health Policy and Service Guidance Package:
Workplace Mental Health Policies and Programmes. Draft document. Geneva, World
Health Organization, Department of Mental
Health and Substance Dependence. (unpublished
document).
Zenere FJ 3rd, Lazarus PJ (1997). The decline of
youth suicidal behaviour in an urban, multicultural
public school system following the introduction of a
suicide prevention and intervention program. Suicide & Life-Threatening Behaviour, 27: 387-402.

47

For more information

Department of Mental
Health and Substance
Dependence
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 791 21 11
Fax: +41 22 791 41 60
E-mail: mnh@who.int
Website: www.who.int/mental_health

Addresses of WHO
Regional Offices

WHO Regional Office
for Africa
Cité du Djoué
PO Box 06
Brazzaville
Congo
Tél: +47 241 39100
+242 8 39100
Fax: +47 241 39501
+242 8 39501

WHO Regional Office
for the Eastern
Mediterranean
WHO Post Office
PO Box 7608
Cairo 11371
Egypt
Tel: +20 2 670 2535
Fax: +20 2 670 2492
E-mail: PIO@emro.who.int

E-mail: regafro@afro.who.int

Pan American Health
Organization/WHO
Regional Office for the
Americas
525, 23rd Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
USA
Tel: +1 202 974 3000
Fax: +1 202 974 3663
E-mail: postmaster@paho.org

48

WHO Regional Office
for Europe
8, Scherfigsvej
2100 Copenhagen Ø
Denmark
Tel: +45 39 17 17 17
Fax: +45 39 17 18 18
E-mail: postmaster@euro.who.int

WHO Regional Office
for South-East Asia
World Health House
Indraprastha Estate
Mahatma Gandhi Road
New Delhi 110 002
India
Tel: +91 11 2337 0804
Fax: +91 11 2337 0197
E-mail: PANDEYH@whosea.org

WHO Regional Office
for the Western Pacific
PO Box 2932
1000 Manila
Philippines
Tel: +63 2 528 8001
Fax: +63 2 521 1036
E-mail: Postmaster@who.org.ph

Evelyn Livia, 9 years old, Indonesia

World Health Organization
Department of Mental Health and Substance Dependence

ISBN 92 4 156257 9

Avenue Appia 20
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 791 21 11
Fax: +41 22 791 41 60
E-mail: mnh@who.int
Website: www.who.int/mental_health

